@c $Id$
@c DDD macros

@c Copyright (C) 2000 Universitaet Passau, Germany.
@c Copyright (C) 2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Written by Andreas Zeller <zeller@gnu.org>.
@c 
@c This file is part of DDD.
@c 
@c DDD is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
@c modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public
@c License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
@c version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
@c 
@c DDD is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
@c See the GNU General Public License for more details.
@c 
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
@c License along with DDD -- see the file COPYING.
@c If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c 
@c DDD is the data display debugger.
@c For details, see the DDD World-Wide-Web page, 
@c `http://www.gnu.org/software/ddd/',
@c or send a mail to the DDD developers <ddd@gnu.org>.

@c Macros
@macro DDD {}
@acronym{@value{DDD}}
@end macro

@macro BASH {}
@acronym{BASH}
@end macro

@macro GDB {}
@acronym{GDB}
@end macro

@macro WDB {}
@acronym{WDB}
@end macro

@macro DBX {}
@acronym{DBX}
@end macro

@macro XDB {}
@acronym{XDB}
@end macro

@macro JDB {}
@acronym{JDB}
@end macro

@macro JDK {}
@acronym{JDK}
@end macro

@macro UNIX {}
@acronym{UNIX}
@end macro

@macro WWW {}
@acronym{WWW}
@end macro

@macro FTP {}
@acronym{FTP}
@end macro

@macro GNU {}
@acronym{GNU}
@end macro

@macro PYDB {}
@code{pydb}
@end macro

@macro VSL {}
@acronym{VSL}
@end macro

@macro TTY {}
@acronym{TTY}
@end macro

@macro MAKE {}
@acronym{GNU Make}
@end macro
