DDD Service 							-*- text -*-
***********

This is a list of people who have asked to be listed as offering
support services for DDD, for a fee or in some cases at no charge.

The information comes from the people who asked to be listed; we do
not include any information we know to be false, but we cannot check
out any of the information; we are transmitting it to you as it was
given to us and do not promise it is correct.  Also, this is not an
endorsement of the people listed here.  We have no opinions and
usually no information about the abilities of any specific person.  We
provide this list to enable you to contact service providers and
decide for yourself whether to hire one.

Before we will list your name in the Service Directory, we ask that
you agree informally to the following terms:

1. You will not restrict (except by copyleft) the use or distribution
of any software, documentation, or other information you supply anyone
in the course of modifying, extending, or supporting DDD.  This
includes any information specifically designed to ameliorate the use
of DDD.

2. You will not take advantage of contact made through the Service
Directory to advertise an unrelated business (e.g., sales of
non-DDD-related proprietary information).  You may spontaneously
mention your availability for general consulting, but you should not
promote a specific unrelated business unless the client asks.

A recent copy of this directory is available at:
	ftp://ftp.ips.cs.tu-bs.de/pub/local/softech/ddd/SERVICE

To have yourself listed, ask:
        ddd@ips.cs.tu-bs.de

** Please keep this file alphabetical **


Reiss GmbH               <reiss@mail.pop-frankfurt.com>
Liebigstr. 9             Fax. +49 6151 292257  (German business hours)
D-64293 Darmstadt        
GERMANY

We provide installation, porting, debugging and customization or
development of DDD in coordination with the DDD maintainers.  Courses
on DDD and other subjects are also available.  Contact
<reiss@mail.pop-frankfurt.com> for details.
